*Or, how I learned to stop worrying and love the weizenbier.*

I kid. I didn’t *just* drink German beer for the whole four days. In
fact, there were periods of several hours where I didn’t touch the
stuff. Instead, I sat, listened and absorbed as much information as I
could, and occasionally contributed some of my own ideas back.

So, what did I learn?

Practice constantly
-------------------

Katas, dojos, and other repurposed Japanese words. Do exercises.
Multiple times, in different ways, using tools and techniques both
familiar and foreign. Always push yourself.

[Martin](http://twitter.com/martinklose) ran the code retreat on the
last day, and pointed out that musicians practice for months so they can
perform for a few nights. We spend a lot of time learning on the job,
but sometimes it’s useful to practice on something that doesn’t ask you
to rush, cut corners and work when you’re not functioning at 100%.
[Adi](http://twitter.com/adibolb) and
[Erik](http://twitter.com/talboomerik) ran a series of sessions on
writing the best code you can, for which I am massively thankful. I’m
going to steal their session on brutal refactoring and hopefully run it
at an [LSCC](http://www.meetup.com/london-software-craftsmanship/)
hands-on session soon.

Know which rules you are breaking and why
-----------------------------------------

This, for me, was the most important. It’s OK to break the rules, as
long as you’re aware you’re doing it and can justify it. This includes
actually knowing the rules. Ones that come to mind are:

-   Red, green, refactor.
-   Take baby steps.
-   Acceptance tests are good.
-   Conditionals are bad.
-   Write the code you want to read, then implement it.
-   If you do something complicated three times, automate it.
-   [SOLID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID_(object-oriented_design))
    is pretty cool, with the exception of the open/closed principle,
    which still makes no sense to me.
-   Everything in [object
    calisthenics](http://www.bennadel.com/resources/uploads/2012/ObjectCalisthenics.pdf)
    is important.

Of course, you may disagree with some of these, but there’s a huge
difference between disagreeing and being ignorant of them. They should
always be running through your mind, and an alarm should go off when you
break one. If you choose to ignore the alarm, you better have a good
reason for doing so.

Library functions are better than language features
---------------------------------------------------

Watching [Andreas](http://twitter.com/leiderleider) demonstrate
Smalltalk, I realised something that had been ticking in my brain for a
very long time. The most well-designed languages don’t have many
features. They don’t need them—the few they have are powerful enough to
simply express anything. Smalltalk doesn’t even have the `if` keyword or
similar. Instead, booleans are objects. As a resuit, they can have
methods, and do. The most important one, `ifTrue:ifFalse:` takes two
blocks (closures), and calls one of them depending on the boolean you’re
calling it on. Conditionals, implemented in the standard library. Pretty
cool, right? It’s all handled through polymorphism: `true` and `false`
simply implement the method differently.

The other thing I took away from this short talk was that Java is not
object-oriented. It just isn’t. Object have behaviour. If the language
encourages you to ask for values rather than tell an object what to do,
it’s not OO.

Monads are hard to explain
--------------------------

But often you can make similarities with things more common in the
Java/C\#/C++ world. Some things are comparable to dependency inversion,
some to container and collection types, and some are unfortunately just
batshit insane.

Following the single responsibility principle is difficult
----------------------------------------------------------

Let’s talk about `if` statements. It’s fairly clear that a method with
an `if` has two responsibilities, not one. While making decisions is a
necessary part of program execution, it should happen at the highest
level possible, not deep down where it’s difficult to find and
understand. What’s not so clear are the boolean logic operators, `&&`
and `||`.

Here’s an example from Conway’s Game of Life:

    public boolean step(boolean alive, int neighbours) {
        return alive && neighbours >= 2 && neighbours <= 3
            || neighbours == 3;
    }

That covers all four rules. The problem is it does a bunch of things. I
can’t even tell how many at a glance—it requires studying the code. The
boolean logic operators are basically `if` blocks in disguise.

Let’s try again:

    public boolean step(boolean alive, Neighbours neighbours) {
        return neighbours.step(alive);
    }

    enum Neighbours {
        Reproduction {
            @Override boolean step(boolean alive) {
                return true;
            }
        }

        public abstract boolean step(boolean alive):
    }

I’ll let you fill in the other implementations of `Neighbours` yourself.
Perhaps at a code retreat. ;-)

DDD simply realises that a thing has several different facets
-------------------------------------------------------------

This is by no means a complete definition of **Domain-Driven Design**,
but it’s something I took away from [Cyril’s](http://twitter.com/cyriux)
session on it. We often talk about an *Account* class when we’re dealing
with that hypothetical bank kata, but accounts have several different
viewpoints.

-   If I’m the account holder, I want to see my balance and
    transactions.
-   However, if I’m a bank manager, I probably want to see information
    such as the account owner’s name and address, salary and whether
    she’s making full use of all account features. I probably want to
    find out if she’s using her packaged travel insurance and how much,
    so I can see whether I can upsell a new account with even more
    features.
-   If I’m a teller, I should probably see a recent list of transactions
    and the dates and times of when the money actually transferred (as
    opposed to when the account holder actually paid for something), so
    I can figure out why a payment didn’t go through.

We should represent these things as concrete objects in our system,
instead of having a single `Account` class which is used by everything.

BDD is not ATDD is not E2ET
---------------------------

Let’s define those three things.

-   **End-to-end testing** is simply the process by which you write a
    test that covers the entirety of a system, or at least as much as
    concerns the feature under test.
-   **Acceptance test driven development** is something I picked up from
    The Pragmatic Programmer—before starting on a feature, determine
    what is required for this feature to be complete. Then, and only
    then, start on implementation (which should include unit testing).
-   **Behaviour-driven development** is closely related to ATDD, but
    involves writing that acceptance test with someone invested in the
    business who understands the customer. Ideally, it would be the
    customer himself.

Why is this important? It comes down to understanding your tools. I hear
people talk about BDD when all they’re doing is writing a lot of
end-to-end or integration tests, which is missing the point. Lots of
integration tests are harmful to efficient software development—they’re
slow, usually because they’re testing the same thing over and over again
with slight variations in one small area (further reading: [Integrated
Tests are a
Scam](http://www.jbrains.ca/permalink/integrated-tests-are-a-scam-part-1)
by *J. B. Rainsberger*). True acceptance tests should be small in number
and simply prove that the feature is working approximately as expected.
Unit tests should cover the rest.

You should practice architecture
--------------------------------

Honestly, it’s worth it. [Benjamin](http://twitter.com/benjamin) ran two
sessions on solving [architectural
katas](http://www.architecturalkatas.com/) which really opened my mind
to different designs, but more importantly, they pointed out to me how
easy it was to miss requirements. It’s worth just sitting down and
talking about what you need—you’ll find that half the time is spent
throwing ideas away and the other half is coming to realisations which
mean you might have to introduce something completely different. The
process also really helps in clarifying the way you communicate, both
inside your team and to the outside as you explain your end result,
either through words or diagrams.

Metrics are not a replacement for thinking
------------------------------------------

I learnt three things about code metrics from
[Kore’s](http://twitter.com/koredn) excellent talk.

1.  There are a lot I have not heard of that could be very useful.
2.  You can combine metrics to make new ones. A simple example is Number
    of Methods / Lines of Code = Average Lines per Method.
3.  You have to think. You can’t follow the metrics blindly.

Simple stuff, but always good to remember.

Kanban is more than a to do list
--------------------------------

[Erik](http://twitter.com/talboomerik) showed us exactly how his
personal kanban works, and I learnt a lot. The most important thing was
that at work, we don’t do kanban. We call it a kanban board, but it’s
really not. There are a few reasons for this:

-   We don’t limit work in progress.
-   Things often pile up.
-   Our backlog is absolutely humongous.

It’s something I believe we need to fix. I find I don’t get much out of
the online software we use unless I put myself into tunnel vision and
ignore most of it, which isn’t healthy. I’ve been using a personal one
on my desk which is much, much simpler for the last couple of days and
it’s made my working life a lot better.

Drink more beer
---------------

And talk to brilliant people. You’ll learn a lot. I did.
