# dotfiles

I talked about the ramifications of uploading your dotfiles to an online repository yesterday, but I also want to talk a little about the practice.

Assuming you're not running Windows (and if you are, I have no good solution except to *stop right now*), you probably have a bunch of files starting with "`.`" in your home directory. Here's mine.

    $ find ~ -maxdepth 1 \( -type f -o -type l \) -name '.*'
    ~/.babel.json
    ~/.bash_history
    ~/.bash_profile
    ~/.bashrc
    ~/.CFUserTextEncoding
    ~/.DS_Store
    ~/.gitconfig
    ~/.gitignore
    ~/.i3
    ~/.irb-history
    ~/.lesshst
    ~/.mkshrc
    ~/.NERDTreeBookmarks
    ~/.netrc
    ~/.node_repl_history
    ~/.nvim
    ~/.nvimrc
    ~/.profile
    ~/.racketrc
    ~/.scala_history
    ~/.sh_history
    ~/.sqlite_history
    ~/.tmux
    ~/.tmux.conf
    ~/.viminfo
    ~/.vimrc
    ~/.wget-hsts
    ~/.zcompdump
    ~/.zcompdump.zwc
    ~/.zhistory
    ~/.zlogin
    ~/.zlogout
    ~/.zprezto
    ~/.zpreztorc
    ~/.zprofile
    ~/.zshenv
    ~/.zshrc

Whoa, that's a lot. Let's see which ones I care about. For today, I just want to focus on one. How about `.gitconfig`, my global Git configuration, for now?

The first thing I'm going to do is create a new Git repository. This repository will be entirely selfish, so I recommend you name it as such. I called mine [*F••• You, Got Mine*][fygm], because it makes me giggle every time I use it.

    $ git init all-mah-stuff
    $ cd all-mah-stuff

I always like to start new repositories with a README to get myself in the right mood.

    $ echo '# All Mah Stuff. Hands Off. <3' > README.md
    $ git add README.md
    $ git commit -m 'README.'

Once you've created it, add a directory named `dotfiles`. You'll want to keep these in a subdirectory because at some point, you might find yourself adding files that need to be synchronised with your dotfiles but don't count as dotfiles themselves. For example, I have scripts in my [`bin`][fygm/bin] directory which are used by my dotfiles, so it makes sense to version-control them together. (I had them split for a long time and it drove me nuts.)

Right. Copy your `.gitconfig` (or whichever file you're using) into your new `dotfiles` directory. I recommend dropping the "`.`" at this time to make the repository easier to work with—it's tricky to manage lots of hidden files. Commit it with a snarky message.

    $ mkdir dotfiles
    $ cp ~/.gitconfig dotfiles/gitconfig
    $ git commit -m "Here's a gitconfig. No, I don't know what it does either."

Next, we want to replace the `.gitconfig` file in our home directory with a symbolic link to our copied file.

    $ ln -sf $PWD/dotfiles/gitconfig ~/.gitconfig

I expect we'll need to do that a lot, so let's make a script called `init` which does the job.

    #!/bin/bash

    DIR="$(cd "$(dirname "${BASH_SOURCE[0]}")" && pwd)"

    ln -sf "$DIR/dotfiles/gitconfig" ~/.gitconfig

Wonderful. `chmod +x init` and commit.

The last thing to do is to push this repository somewhere else so we can use the same files on multiple computers. Go ahead and create a repository on GitHub, BitBucket or something else and push, push, push.

Now, whenever you make a change to that file, commit and push. Whenever you're on another computer, `git pull` and `./init`  before you get cracking. These two steps will make sure you always have your files synced, wherever you go.

[fygm]: https://github.com/SamirTalwar/fygm
[fygm/bin]: https://github.com/SamirTalwar/fygm/tree/master/bin
